ML Beetle info pages (#4)
Imageomics/HDR-SMood-Challenge: pages/evaluation.md

# Beetles as Sentinel Taxa: Evaluation

> This challenge is an out-of-sample prediction challenge. The goal is to predict the drought status at a location on a specific date based on images of carabid beetle specimens collected at the location on that date. This will be an out-of-sample challenge because training data will be assembled from one site of locations, and test data will assembled from a different set of locations. All locations will be NEON sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This challenge is an out-of-sample prediction challenge. The goal is to predict the drought status at a location on a specific date based on images of carabid beetle specimens collected at the location on that date. This will be an out-of-sample challenge because training data will be assembled from one site of locations, and test data will be assembled from a different set of locations. All locations will be NEON sites.
```

> This challenge will provide insight about how well carabid beetles can serve as an indicator taxa to understand local drought conditions. This challenge will help ecologists better understand how inter- and intra-specific variation in carabid traits correspond with local environmental conditions, and over what time scales. We expect trait variations among specimens can be detected in the imagery and linked to drought metrics using AI/ML models. If these models perform better than benchmark models (e.g., historical mean drought condition at a site for the given day-of-year, or models using only metadata), it suggests there is ecologically relevant information that can be extracted from specimen images and linked to environmental data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This challenge will provide insight about how well carabid beetles can serve as an indicator taxa to understand local drought conditions. This challenge will help ecologists better understand how inter- and intra-specific variation in carabid traits correspond with local environmental conditions, and over what time scales. We expect trait variations among specimens can be detected in the imagery and linked to drought metrics using AI/ML models. If these models perform better than benchmark models (e.g., historical mean drought condition at a site for the given day-of-year, or models using only metadata), it suggests there is ecologically relevant trait information that can be extracted from specimen images and linked to environmental data. 
```

> **What to predict:** The Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) metric represents cumulative drought conditions over a time window. For this challenge, participants will submit predictions for SPEI metrics for specific sampling events, where the SPEI values were calculated using three different time windows preceeding the sampleing event to represent three different temporal scales over which different types of ecological processes may be affected: 

Reviewer 2: lgtm!

- `spei_30d` is drought conditions calcualted from data for the 30 day window preceding sample collection
- `spei_1y` is the drought condition calculated from the year preceding sample collection
- `spei_2y` is the drought condition calculated from the two years preceding sample collection

**The submission file** will be a long-format flat table (csv file format) with a prediction for each `spei_30d`, `spei_1y`, and `spei_2y` for each `event_id`. Predictions will include a measure of uncertainty, so each prediction will include `mu` (mean) and `sigma` (standard devation). See the example submissoin below for more details. 

> ## The Test Dataset

Reviewer 2: @work4cs I believe we will be passing a list of images (all within the same event) to the submitted model, that should return the submission structure in JSON format where the keys are the three SPEI metrics and within those are the `mu` and `sigma` values. I don't think we are passing a metadata file.

Reviewer 2: I've updated the files to reflect this.

This test data set comprises:

> - An image collection of carabid beelte specimens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An image collection of carabid beetle specimens.
```

- A metadata table

### Data Fields in the Metadata Table
| fieldName | description | dataType | relatedTerms |
|---|---|---|---|
| event_id | An (anonymized) identifier for the set of information associated with the event, which includes information about the place and time of the event | string | [DWC_v2009-04-24:eventID](http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/history/index.htm#eventID-2009-04-24)
| domain_id | Unique identifier of the NEON domain | string | [DWC_v2009-04-24:locationID](http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/history/index.htm#locationID-2009-04-24)
| scientific_name | Scientific name, associated with the taxonID. This is the name of the lowest level taxonomic rank that can be determined | string | [DWC_v2009-04-24:scientificName](http://tdwg.github.io/dwc/terms/history/index.htm#scientificName-2009-09-21)
| image_id | Unique identifier for image | string  | |

> | image_uri | Location of image media resource (link to image) | string | |

Reviewer 3: @DavidCarlyn, I think these were changed (based on [your commit](https://github.com/Imageomics/HDR-SMood-Challenge/pull/4/commits/7cc1d505da67b0a6c46337233e1c6e449268cef3)), could you update this as well? Or @work4cs?

## Evaluation Phases

> There are 2 phases. Each test data set is split into a development set and a final test set.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are 2 phases. Each test data set is split into a development set and a final test set (the challenge dataset).  
```

1. **Development phase:**
	* The provided training data contains:

> 		- Images of beetle specimens

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		- Images of carabid beetle specimens from various species, collection sites, and dates.
```

> 		- A metadata csv including SPEI values corresponding with each of the `event_id`s in the training dataset. 
> 	* The goal is to develop an algorithm to predict each of the three SPEI values for an `event_id` given the images of beetles collected during that sampling event.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		- A metadata CSV including SPEI values corresponding with each of the `eventId`s in the training dataset. 
	* The goal is to develop an algorithm to predict each of the three SPEI values for an `eventId` given the images of beetles collected during that sampling event.
```
@DavidCarlyn, this is the correct variable, yes?

	* Upload your model: feedback will be provided on the development set until the end of the challenge; one submission is allowed per day.

> 		1. CRPS values (see below for more details) will be returned for all predictions (you can calculate the scores yourself, but we will provide a scoring dashboard as well) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
		1. CRPS values (see below for more details) will be returned for all predictions (you can calculate the scores yourself, but we will provide a scoring dashboard as well) .
```
What do you mean by this? We have a scoring program which will take the predictions output by their models for scoring.

Reviewer 2: @work4cs

Reviewer 3: We just need to clarify the prediction/submission output. We are also allowing up to 5 submissions per day (I believe).

| SPEI_30d | Target variable: SPEI calculated over a short timescale (1 month), reflecting short-term moisture conditions. | real | |
| SPEI_1y | Target variable: SPEI calculated over a medium timescale (1 year), reflecting seasonal precipitation patterns. | real | |
| SPEI_2y | Target variable: SPEI calculated over a long timescale (2 years), reflecting long-term hydrological conditions. | real | |

## Evaluation Phases
There are 2 phases. Each test data set is split into a development set and a final test set (the challenge dataset).  
1. **Development phase:**
	* The provided training data contains:
		- Images of carabid beetle specimens from various species, collection sites, and dates.
		- A metadata CSV including SPEI values corresponding with each of the `eventId`s in the training dataset. 
	* The goal is to develop an algorithm to predict each of the three SPEI values for an `eventId` given the images of beetles collected during that sampling event.
	* Upload your model: feedback will be provided on the development set until the end of the challenge; one submission is allowed per day.

> 		1. CRPS values (see below for more details) will be returned for all predictions (you can calculate the scores yourself, but we will provide a scoring dashboard as well) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I think we can maybe just delete this?

This competition allows you to submit your developed algorithm, which will be run on the development and the final test dataset through CodaBench.

Your algorithm needs to generate three SPEI predictions (`spei_30d`, `spei_1y`, and `spei_2y`) for each `event_id` when given a collection of images of specimens collected during a given sampling `event_id`. 

> Each prediction will be scored using the continuous rank probability score (CRPS), which provides a metric to evaluate both the accuracy and precision of a prediction when compared against observed datapoint ([Gneiting and Raftery 2007](https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437)). Here we use the convention where 0 is the best possible score, and CRPS values increase as prediction accuracy and precision decreases. This approach has been used successfully in forecasting challenges like the [NEON Ecological Forecasting Challenge](https://projects.ecoforecast.org/neon4cast-ci/) organized by the [Ecological Forecasting Intiative (EFI)](https://ecoforecast.org/) (see the documentation [here](https://projects.ecoforecast.org/neon4cast-docs/Evaluation.html)). Submissions to this challenge will be scored using the [`score4cast` R package](https://github.com/eco4cast/score4cast) developed by EFI. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each prediction will be scored using the continuous rank probability score (CRPS), which provides a metric to evaluate both the accuracy and precision of a prediction when compared against an observed datapoint ([Gneiting and Raftery 2007](https://doi.org/10.1198/016214506000001437)). Here we use the convention where 0 is the best possible score, and CRPS values increase as prediction accuracy and precision decrease. This approach has been used successfully in forecasting challenges like the [NEON Ecological Forecasting Challenge](https://projects.ecoforecast.org/neon4cast-ci/) organized by the [Ecological Forecasting Initiative (EFI)](https://ecoforecast.org/) (see the documentation [here](https://projects.ecoforecast.org/neon4cast-docs/Evaluation.html)). Submissions to this challenge will be scored using the [`score4cast` R package](https://github.com/eco4cast/score4cast) developed by EFI. 
```
@work4cs, just to confirm, you got that working for the challenge, right?

> The CRPS values for a submission will be averated across `event_id`s to produce an overall score, where the winning submission will have the lowest overall score. For the challenge, we will also post a leader board with sub-categories for each SPEI time scale (30 days, 1 year, 2 years). There will also be an extra-challenging "novel eco-domain" category, where beetle images and metadata from sampling events from an eco-domain that was not included in the training dataset will be provided as input as a true out-of-sample challenge. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CRPS values for a submission will be averaged across `event_id`s to produce an overall score, where the winning submission will have the lowest overall score. For the challenge, we will also post a leader board with sub-categories for each SPEI time scale (30 days, 1 year, 2 years). There will also be an extra-challenging "novel eco-domain" category, where beetle images and metadata from sampling events from an eco-domain that was not included in the training dataset will be provided as input as a true out-of-sample challenge. 
```

> The CRPS values for a submission will be averaged across `event_id`s to produce an overall score, where the winning submission will have the lowest overall score. For the challenge, we will also post a leader board with sub-categories for each SPEI time scale (30 days, 1 year, 2 years). There will also be an extra-challenging "novel eco-domain" category, where beetle images and metadata from sampling events from an eco-domain that was not included in the training dataset will be provided as input as a true out-of-sample challenge. 
> 
> \*  Note that these hybrids are just the most common within this particular dataset, not necessarily in general.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The CRPS values for a submission will be averaged across `eventId`s to produce an overall score, where the winning submission will have the lowest overall score. For the challenge, we will also post a leaderboard with sub-categories for each SPEI time scale (30 days, 1 year, 2 years). There will also be an extra-challenging "novel eco-domain" category, where beetle images and metadata from sampling events from an eco-domain that was not included in the training dataset will be provided as input as a true out-of-sample challenge. 

```

This competition allows you to submit your developed algorithm, which will be run on the development and the final test dataset through CodaBench.

> Your algorithm needs to generate three SPEI predictions (`spei_30d`, `spei_1y`, and `spei_2y`) for each `event_id` when given a collection of images of specimens collected during a given sampling `event_id`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your algorithm needs to generate three SPEI predictions (`spei_30d`, `spei_1y`, and `spei_2y`) for each `event_id` when given a collection of images of specimens collected during a given sampling `eventID`. 
```
